[Music]
I am a writer writing books is my
profession but it's more than that of
course it is also my great lifelong love
and fascination and I don't expect that
that's ever going to change
but that said something kind of peculiar
has happened recently in my life and in
my career which has caused me to have to
sort of recalibrate my whole
relationship with this work and the
peculiar thing is that I recently wrote
this book this memoir called Eat Pray
Love which decidedly unlike any of my
previous books went out in the world for
some reason and became this big mega
sensation international bestseller thing
the result of which is that everywhere I
go now people treat me like I'm doomed
seriously to whom doomed like they come
up to me now like all worried and they
say aren't you afraid aren't you afraid
you're never going to be able to top
that aren't you afraid you're gonna keep
writing for your whole life and you're
never again gonna create a book that
anybody in the world cares about at all
ever again
so that's reassuring you know but it
would be worse except for that I happen
to remember that over 20 years ago when
I first started telling people when I
was a teenager that I wanted to be a
writer I was met with this same kind of
sort of fear-based reaction and people
would say aren't you afraid you're never
going to have any success aren't you
afraid the humiliation of rejection will
kill you aren't you afraid that you're
going to work your whole life at this
craft and nothing's ever going to come
of it you're going to die on a scrap
heap of broken dreams with your mouth
filled with bitter ash of failure
like that you know and the answer short
answer to all those questions is yes
yes I'm afraid of all those things and I
always have been and I'm afraid of many
many more things besides that you know
people can't even guess at like seaweed
and and other things that are scary but
when it comes to writing the the thing
that I've been sort of thinking about
lately and wondering about lately is why
you know is it rational is it logical
that anybody should be expected to be
afraid of the work that they feel they
were put on this earth to do you know
and what is it specifically about
creative ventures this seems to make us
really nervous about each other's mental
health in a way that other careers kind
of don't do you know like my dad for
example was a chemical engineer and I
don't recall once in his 40 years of
Chemical Engineering anybody asking him
if he was afraid to be a chemical
engineer you know it just didn't come
like got chemical engineering block John
you know how's it going
and it just didn't come up like that you
know but to be fair right chemical
engineers as a group you know haven't
really earned a reputation over the
centuries for being alcoholic manic
depressives and we writers you know we
kind of do have that reputation and not
not just writers but creative people
across all genres it seems have this
reputation for being enormous Lee
mentally unstable and you know all you
have to do is look at the very grim
death count in the twentieth century
alone of really magnificent creative
minds who died young and often at their
own hands you know and even the ones who
didn't literally commit suicide seemed
to be really undone by their gifts you
know Norman Mailer just before he died
last interview he said every one of my
books has killed me a little more an
extraordinary statement to make about
your life's work you know but we don't
even blink when we hear somebody say
this because we've heard that kind of
stuff for so long and somehow we've
completely internalized and accepted
collectively this notion that creativity
and suffering are somehow inherently
linked and that artistry in the end will
always ultimately lead
- anguish and the question that I want
to ask everybody here today is are you
guys all cool with that idea like are
you comfortable with that because you
look at it even from an inch away and
you know I'm not at all comfortable with
that assumption I think it's odious and
I also think it's dangerous and I don't
want to see it perpetuated into the next
century I think better if we encourage
you know our great creative minds to
live you know and and I definitely know
that in in my case in my situation it
would be very dangerous for me to start
sort of leaking down that dark path of
assumption you know particularly given
the circumstance that I'm in right now
in my career which is you know like
check it out I'm pretty young I'm only
about 40 years old I still have maybe
another four decades of work left in me
and it's exceedingly likely that
anything I write from this point forward
is going to be judged by the world as
the work that came after the freakish
success of my last book right I should
just put it bluntly cuz we're all
friends here now it's exceedingly likely
that my greatest success is behind me
you know um oh jesus what a thought you
know like that's the kind of thought
that could lead a person to start
drinking gin at 9 o'clock in the morning
and you know I don't want to go there
you know I would prefer to keep doing
this work that I love and so the
question becomes how you know and and so
it seems to me upon a lot of reflection
that the way that I have to work now in
order to continue writing is that I have
to create some sort of protective
psychological construct right I have to
sort of find some way to have a safe
distance you know between me as I am
writing and my very natural anxiety
about what the reaction to that writing
is going to be from now on and and as
I've been looking over the last year for
like models for how to do that I've been
sort of looking across time and I've
been trying to find like other societies
to see if they might have had better and
saner ideas than we have about how to
help creative people sort of manage the
inherent emotional risks of of
creativity and that search has led me to
ancient Greece and ancient Rome so stay
with me because it does circle
around back but ancient Greece and
ancient Rome people did not happen to
believe that creativity came from human
beings back then okay people believed
that creativity was this divine
attendant spirit that came to human
beings from some distant and unknowable
source for a distant and unknowable
reasons the Greeks famously called these
divine attendant spirits of creativity
Damons Socrates famously believed that
he had a daemon who spoke wisdom to him
from afar the Romans had the same idea
but they called that sort of disembodied
creative spirit a genius which is great
because the Romans did not actually
think that a genius was a particularly
clever individual they believed that a
genius was the sort of magical divine
entity who was believed to literally
live in the walls of an artist's studio
kind of like Dobby the house-elf and who
would come out and serve invisibly
assist the artists with their work and
would shape the outcome of that work so
brilliant there it is right there that
distance that I'm talking about that
psychological construct to protect you
from the results of your work you know
and everyone knew that this is how it
functioned right so the ancient artist
was protected from certain things like
for example too much narcissism right if
your work was brilliant couldn't take
all the credit for it
everybody knew you had this like
disembodied genius who had helped you if
your work bombed not entirely your fault
you know
everyone knew your genius was kind of
lame and this is how people thought
about creativity in the West for a
really long time and then the
Renaissance came and everything changed
and we had this big idea and the big
idea was let's put the individual human
being at the center of the universe
right above all gods and mysteries and
there's no more room for like mystical
creatures who take dictation from the
divine and and it's the beginning of
rational humanism and people started to
believe that creativity came completely
from the self of the individual and for
the first time in history you start to
hear people referring to this or that
artist as being a genius rather than
having a genius and I gotta tell you I
think that was a huge error you know I
think that allowing somebody like one
mere person
believe that he or she is like the
vessel you know like the font and the
essence and the source of all divine
creative unknowable eternal mystery is
just like a smidge too much
responsibility to put on one fragile
human psyche it's like asking somebody
to swallow the Sun you know it's just
completely warps and distorts egos and
it creates all these unmanageable
expectations about performance and I
think the pressure of that has been
killing off our artists for the last 500
years and if this is true and I think it
is true the question becomes you know
what now you know can we do this
differently maybe go back to some more
ancient understanding about the
relationship between humans and the
creative mystery maybe not you know like
maybe we can't just erase 500 years of
rational humanistic thought and
118-minute speech and there's probably
people in this audience who would raise
like really legitimate scientific
suspicions about the notion of basically
fairies who follow people around like
rubbing fairy juice on their projects
and stuff like I'm not probably gonna
bring you all along with me on this but
the question that I kind of want to pose
is you know why not
why not think about it this way because
it makes as much sense as anything else
I have ever heard in terms of explaining
the utter maddening capriciousness of
the creative process a process which as
anybody who has ever tried to make
something which is to say as basically
everyone here knows does not always
behave rationally and in fact can
sometimes feel downright paranormal I
had this encounter recently where I met
the extraordinary American poet Ruth
Stone who's now in her 90s but she's
been a poet her entire life and she told
me that when she was growing up in rural
Virginia she would be out working in the
fields and she said she would like feel
and hear a poem coming at her from over
the landscape and she said it was like a
thunderous train of error and it would
come barreling down at her over the
landscape and when she felt it coming
because it would like shake the earth
under her feet she knew that she had
only one thing to do at that point and
that was to in her words
like hell and she would like run like
hell to the house and she'd be getting
chased by his poem and the whole deal
was that she had to get to a piece of
paper and a pencil fast enough so they
when it thundered through her she could
collect it and grab it on the page and
other times she wouldn't be fast enough
so she'd be like running and running and
running and the she wouldn't get to the
house and the poem would like barrel
through her and she would miss it and
she said it would continue on across the
landscape looking as she put it for
another poet and and then there were
these times this is the piece I never
forgot she said that there were moments
when she would almost miss it right so
she's like running into the house and
she's looking for the paper and the poem
passes through her and she grabs a
pencil just as it's going through her
and then she said it was like she would
reach out with her other hand and she
would catch it she would catch the poem
by its tail and she would pull it
backwards into her body as she was
transcribing on the page and in these
instances the poem would come up on the
page perfect and intact but backwards
from the last word to the first so when
I heard that I was like that's
it's not at all what my creative process
is I'm not the pipeline you know like
I'm a mule and the way that I have to
work is that I have to get up at the
same time every day and like sweat and
labor and like barrel through it really
awkwardly but even I in my mule ish Ness
I have brushed up against that thing you
know at times and I would imagine that a
lot of you have to you know like even I
have had work or ideas come through me
from a source that I honestly cannot
identify and what is that thing and how
are we to relate to it in a way that
will not make us lose our minds but in
fact might actually keep us sane and for
me the best contemporary example that I
have of how to do that is the musician
Tom Waits who I got to interview several
years ago on a on a magazine assignment
and we were talking about this and you
know you you know Tom I mean for most of
his life he was pretty much the
embodiment of the tormented contemporary
modern artist you know like trying to
control and manage and dominate these
sort of uncontrollable creative impulses
you know that were totally internalized
but then he got older and he got calmer
and one day he was driving on the
freeway in Los Angeles he told me and
this is when it all changed for him and
and he's like speeding along and all of
a sudden he hears this little fragment
of melody you know that comes into his
head as inspiration often comes elusive
and tantalizing and he wants it you know
it's gorgeous and and he longs for it
but he has no way to get it he doesn't
have a piece of paper he doesn't have a
pencil he doesn't have a tape recorder
so he starts to feel all that old
anxiety start to rise in him like I'm
gonna lose this thing you know I'm gonna
be haunted by this song forever and I'm
not good enough and I can't do it and
instead of panicking he just stopped he
just stopped that whole mental process
and he did something completely novel he
just looked up at the sky and he said
excuse me can you not see that I'm
driving
do I look like I can write down a song
right now you know if you really want to
exist come back at a more opportune
moment when I can take care of you
otherwise go bother somebody else today
go bother Leonard Cohen you know and and
his whole work process changed after
that not the work the work was still
often times as dark as ever you know but
the process and the heavy anxiety around
it was released when he took the Jeannie
the genius out of him where it was
causing nothing but trouble and released
it kind of back where it came from and
realized that this didn't have to be
this internalized tormented thing it
could be this peculiar wondrous bizarre
collaboration kind of conversation
between Tom and the strange external
thing that was not quite Tom
so when I heard that story it started to
shift a little bit the way that I worked
to and it already saved me once this
idea it saved me when I was in the
middle of writing eat Pray Love and I
fell into one of those sort of pits of
despair that we all fall into when we're
working on something that's not coming
and you start to think this is going to
be a disaster this is gonna be the worst
book ever written not just bad but the
worst book ever written and and I
started to think I should just dump this
project you know but then I remembered
Tom talking to the open air and I I
tried it so I just lifted my face up
from the manuscript and I directed my
comments to an empty corner of the room
and I said aloud
listen you thing you and I both know
that if this book isn't brilliant that
is not entirely my fault right because
you can see that I am putting everything
I have into this you know I don't have
any more than this so if you want it to
be better then you got to show up and do
your part of the deal okay but if you
don't do that you know what the hell
with it I'm gonna keep writing anyway
because that's my job and I would please
like the record to reflect today that I
showed up for my part of the job
because in the end it's like this soap a
centuries ago in the deserts of North
Africa people used to gather for these
moonlight dances of sacred dancing music
that would go on for hours and hours
until dawn and they were always
magnificent because the dancers were
professionals and they were terrific
right but every once in a while very
rarely something would happen and one of
these performers would actually become
transcendent and I know you know what
I'm talking about because I know you've
all seen at some point in your life a
performance like this you know and it
was like time would stop and the dancer
would sort of step through some kind of
portal and he wasn't doing anything
different than he had ever done you know
a thousand nights before but everything
would align and all of a sudden he would
no longer appear to be nearly human you
know he would be like lit from within
and lit from below and all like lit up
on fire with divinity and when this
happened back then people knew it for
what it was you know they called it by
its name they would put their hands
together and they would start to chant
allah-allah Allah God God God that's God
you know curious historical footnote
when the Moors invaded southern Spain
they took this custom with them and the
pronunciation changed over the centuries
from Allah Allah Allah to allay Olleh
Olleh which you still here in bullfights
and in flamenco dances in Spain when a
performer has done something impossible
and magic Allah Allah Allah Allah
Magnificent Bravo incomprehensible there
it is a glimpse of God which is great
because we need that but the tricky bit
comes the next morning right for the
dancer himself when he wakes up and
discovers that it's Tuesday at 11 a.m.
and he's no longer a glimpse of God he's
just an aging mortal with really bad
knees and you know maybe he's never
going to ascend to that height again and
maybe nobody will ever chant God's name
again as he spins and what is he then to
do with the rest of his life this is
hard this is one of the most painful
reconciliations to make in a creative
life
but maybe it doesn't have to be quite so
full of anguish if you never happened to
believe in the first place that the most
extraordinary aspects of your being came
from you but maybe if you just believe
that they were unknown to you you know
from some unimaginable source for some
exquisite portion of your life to be
passed along when you're finished with
somebody else and you know if we think
about it this way it starts to change
everything you know this is how I've
started to think and this is certainly
how I was thinking about it in the last
few months you know as I've been working
on the book that will soon be published
as the dangerously frightening Lee over
anticipated follow-up to my freakish
success and and and what I have to sort
of keep telling myself when I get really
psyched out about that is don't be
afraid don't be daunted just do your job
continue to show up for your piece of it
whatever that might be if your job is to
dance do your dance if the divine
cockeyed genius assigned to your case
decides to let some sort of wonderment
be glimpsed for just one moment through
your efforts than Olay and if not do
your dance anyhow and dole a to you
nonetheless I believe this and I feel
like we must teach it
oleh to you nonetheless just for having
the sheer human love and stubbornness to
keep showing up thank you
[Applause]
thank you